In computing, a network can be formed by anywhere from 2 devices to billions. These devices include everything from your
laptop and phone to security cameras, traffic lights and even farming!

What is the internet?
The Internet is one giant network that consists of many, many small networks within itself.
These small networks are called private networks, where networks connecting these small networks are called public networks.

- A private network
- A public network

Identifying Devices on a network

Devices have the same thing: two means of identification, with one being permeable. These are:

- An IP Address
- A Media Access Control (MAC) Address -- think of this as being similar to a serial number.

IP Addresses (Internet Protocol)

IP address can be used as a way of identifying a host on a network for a period of time, where that IP address can then be
associated with another device without the IP address changing.

Octet #1    Octet #2     Octet #3     Octet #4
  192     .   168     .     1      .     1
 0-255       0-255        0-255        0-255

An IP address is a set of numbers that are divided into four octets. The value of each octet will summarise to be the IP
address of the device on the network. This number is calculated through a technique known as IP addressing & subnetting.

IP addresses can change from device to device but cannot be active simultaneously more than once within the same network.

IP addresses can change from device to device but cannot be active simultaneously more than once within the same network.

Device Name	           IP Address	         IP Address Type
DESKTOP-KJE57FD	      192.168.1.77	            Private
DESKTOP-KJE57FD	      86.157.52.21	            Public
CMNatic-PC	          192.168.1.74	            Private
CMNatic-PC	          86.157.52.21              Public

These two devices will be able to use their private IP addresses to communicate with each other. However, any data sent to
the Internet from either of these devices will be identified by the same public IP address. Public IP addresses are given
by your Internet Service Provider (or ISP).

IPv4, which uses a numbering system of 2^32 IP addresses (4.29 billion)

IPv6 is a new iteration of the Internet Protocol addressing scheme to help tackle this issue.

Supports up to 2^128 of IP addresses (340 trillion-plus), resolving the issues faced with IPv4
More efficient due to new methodologies

MAC Addresses

This network interface is assigned a unique address at the factory it was built at, called a MAC (Media Access Control ) address.
The MAC address is a twelve-character hexadecimal number (a base sixteen numbering system used in computing to represent numbers)
split into two's and separated by a colon. These colons are considered separators. For example, a4:c3:f0:85:ac:2d.
The first six characters represent the company that made the network interface, and the last six is a unique number.

However, an interesting thing with MAC addresses is that they can be faked or "spoofed" in a process known as spoofing.
This spoofing occurs when a networked device pretends to identify as another using its MAC address.
When this occurs, it can often break poorly implemented security designs that assume that devices talking on a
network are trustworthy.

Ping (ICMP)

Ping is one of the most fundamental network tools available to us. Ping uses ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol)
packets to determine the performance of a connection between devices, for example, if the connection exists or is reliable.

The syntax to do a simple ping is ping IP address or website URL.