A command line editor
Vi is a command line text editor.
There are two modes in Vi. Insert (or Input) mode and Edit mode. In input mode you may input or enter content into the file.
In edit mode you can move around the file, perform actions such as deleting, copying, search and replace, saving etc.

vi <file>
Switch to insert mode by pressing i.
Type in a few lines of text and press Esc which will take you back to edit mode.

Saving and Exit

ZZ (Note: capitals) - Save and exit
:q! - discard all changes, since the last save, and exit
:w - save file but don't exit
:wq - again, save and exit

Most commands within vi are executed as soon as you press a sequence of keys. Any command beginning
with a colon ( : ) requires you to hit <enter> to complete the command.

Other ways to view files

cat (concatenate)
It's main purpose is to join files together but in it's most basic form it is useful for just viewing files.

cat <file>
for larger files : less <file>
less allows you to move up and down within a file using the arrow keys. You may go forward a whole page using
the SpaceBar or back a page by pressing b. When you are done you can press q for quit.

Navigating a file in Vi

Arrow keys - move the cursor around
j, k, h, l - move the cursor down, up, left and right (similar to the arrow keys)
^ (caret) - move cursor to beginning of current line
$ - move cursor to end of the current line
nG - move to the nth line (eg 5G moves to 5th line)
G - move to the last line
w - move to the beginning of the next word
nw - move forward n word (eg 2w moves two words forwards)
b - move to the beginning of the previous word
nb - move back n word
{ - move backward one paragraph
} - move forward one paragraph

If you type :set nu in edit mode within vi it will enable line numbers.
I find that turning line numbers on makes working with files a lot easier.

Deleting content

x - delete a single character
nx - delete n characters (eg 5x deletes five characters)
dd - delete the current line
dn - d followed by a movement command. Delete to where the movement command would have taken you. (eg d5w means delete 5 words)

Undoing

u - Undo the last action (you may keep pressing u to keep undoing)
U (Note: capital) - Undo all changes to the current line